docs/backend_api_spec.md, before:

# ChatForge Backend API Specification

Version: 2025-10-07
Status: Draft (authoritative for current code on branch `refactor/frontend_rewrite`)
Base URL: `https://<host>` (all endpoints are prefixed with `/v1` except health which also supports `/health`/`/healthz`)
Authentication: JSON Web Tokens (JWT) via `Authorization: Bearer <accessToken>` unless explicitly marked Public.
Content Type: `application/json` unless stated (multipart for image upload, SSE for streaming chat if enabled by client request headers).

## Conventions
- All date/time fields are ISO 8601 UTC strings unless otherwise noted.
- IDs are UUID v4 (or NanoID for images) unless externally sourced.
- Pagination uses opaque `cursor` tokens where provided; message pagination uses `after_seq` integer sequence numbers.
- Errors follow `{ error: <code>, message?: <human readable>, details?: any }`.
- All data is user-scoped: authenticated user only sees/acts on their own resources.

## Authentication & Users

### POST /v1/auth/register
Register a new user.
Request JSON body:
```
{
  "email": "user@example.com",
  "password": "min 8 chars",
  "displayName": "Optional Name"
}
```
Responses:
- 201 Created:
```
{
  "user": {"id":"...","email":"...","displayName": "...", "emailVerified": false, "createdAt": "..."},
  "tokens": { "accessToken": "...", "refreshToken": "..." }
}
```
- 400 validation_error | invalid_email | weak_password
- 409 email_taken
- 500 registration_failed
Rate limits: 3/hour/IP.

### POST /v1/auth/login
Authenticate existing user.
Request body: `{ "email": "...", "password": "..." }`
Success 200:
```
{
  "user": {"id":"...","email":"...","displayName":"...","emailVerified":false,"createdAt":"...","lastLoginAt":"..."},
  "tokens": {"accessToken":"...","refreshToken":"..."}
}
```
Errors: 400 validation_error, 401 invalid_credentials, 500 login_failed.
Rate limits: 5 / 15min / IP.

### POST /v1/auth/refresh
Refresh access token.
Body: `{ "refreshToken": "<token>" }`
200: `{ "accessToken": "..." }`
Errors: 400 validation_error, 401 refresh_token_expired, 403 invalid_refresh_token | invalid_token, 500 refresh_failed.

### GET /v1/auth/me
Auth required. Returns `{ "user": { id, email, displayName, ... } }`.

### POST /v1/auth/logout
Stateless logout (client discards tokens). Always 200: `{ "message": "Logged out successfully" }`.

## Health

### GET /health or /healthz
Public. Returns status + environment basics.
```
{
  "status": "ok",
  "uptime": <seconds>,
  "provider": "openai-compatible",
  "model": "<defaultModel>",
  "persistence": { "enabled": true, "retentionDays": <int> }
}
```

## Providers
Manage upstream AI API provider configurations (per user).
All endpoints require auth.

### GET /v1/providers
List providers: `{ "providers": [ { id, name, provider_type, base_url, enabled, is_default, created_at, ... } ] }`

### GET /v1/providers/default
Get effective default provider. 200 provider object or 404 not_found.

### GET /v1/providers/{id}
Get single provider. 404 not_found.

### POST /v1/providers
Create provider.
Body fields:
```
{
  "id?": "uuid (optional)",
  "name": "string",
  "provider_type": "openai|...",
  "api_key?": "string",
  "base_url?": "https://...",
  "enabled?": true,
  "is_default?": false,
  "extra_headers?": { "Header": "Value" },
  "metadata?": { "model_filter": { /* filter spec */ }, ... }
}
```
Responses: 201 with created object; 400 invalid_request; 409 conflict (duplicate); 500 internal_server_error.

### PUT /v1/providers/{id}
Update mutable fields (same shape as create, all optional). 200 updated, 404 not_found.

### POST /v1/providers/{id}/default
Set provider as default. 200 provider, 404 not_found.

### DELETE /v1/providers/{id}
Deletes provider. 204 empty or 404 not_found.

### GET /v1/providers/{id}/models
Fetch upstream models via stored credentials. Applies optional model filtering.
Success: `{ provider: { id, name, provider_type }, models: [ { id, ...upstream } ] }`
Errors: 400 invalid_provider | disabled | bad request reasons; 404 not_found; 502 bad_gateway/provider_error; 500 internal_server_error.

### POST /v1/providers/test
Test a provider configuration without saving.
Body requires: `name`, `provider_type`, `api_key`; optional `base_url`, `extra_headers`, `metadata.model_filter`.
Success 200: `{ success: true, message: "Connection successful! Found X models (sample1, sample2, ...).", models: <count> }`
Errors 400 test_failed (with detail), 400 invalid_request.

### POST /v1/providers/{id}/test
Test an existing stored provider (optionally overriding `base_url`, `extra_headers`, `metadata.model_filter`). Similar response codes to generic test.

## Conversations
Conversation & message lifecycle (requires persistence enabled). All routes require auth. If persistence disabled, routes respond 501 not_implemented.

### POST /v1/conversations/migrate
Migrates anonymous (session-bound) conversations to authenticated user.
Body: none.
Success 200: `{ migrated: <int>, message: "..." }`.
Errors: 400 bad_request (no session), 500 internal_error.

### GET /v1/conversations
Query params: `cursor?`, `limit?`, `include_deleted?=true|false`.
Returns cursor-paginated list.
Success 200: shape:
```
{
  "items": [ { id, title, model, provider_id, created_at, updated_at, deleted_at?, ... } ],
  "next_cursor": "..." | null
}
```
Errors 500 internal_error.

### POST /v1/conversations
Create conversation.
Body (all optional except may desire model/provider):
```
{
  "title?": "string",
  "provider_id?": "uuid",
  "model?": "model-id",
  "streamingEnabled?": true,
  "toolsEnabled?": true,
  "qualityLevel?": "default|...",
  "reasoningEffort?": "low|medium|high",
  "verbosity?": "...",
  "system_prompt?": "string"  // or legacy systemPrompt
}
```
201: Full conversation record including metadata.
Errors: 500 db_error/internal_error.

### GET /v1/conversations/{id}
Query params: `after_seq?=N` (default 0), `limit?=50`.
Returns conversation metadata plus paginated messages.
200 Response shape:
```
{
  id, title, model, provider_id,
  system_prompt: "..." | null,
  active_system_prompt_id: "uuid" | null,
  messages: [ { id, seq, role, content, created_at, ... } ],
  next_after_seq: <next seq or null>,
  ...other conversation fields
}
```
Errors: 404 not_found, 500 internal_error.

### DELETE /v1/conversations/{id}
Soft delete (marks deleted_at). 204 or 404 not_found.

### PUT /v1/conversations/{id}/messages/{messageId}/edit
Edits message content then forks conversation starting from that message; deletes subsequent messages in original.
Body:
- `content`: string OR mixed-content array (objects with type `text` + `text` field or `image_url` etc.)
Validation: must not be empty (at least one text or image element).
200:
```
{
  "message": { id, seq, content },
  "new_conversation_id": "uuid"
}
```
Errors: 400 bad_request, 404 not_found, 500 internal_error.

## Chat (Proxy Completions & Tools)
All endpoints require auth.

### POST /v1/chat/completions
See [Chat Completions Spec](./backend_api_chat_completions_spec.md) for full details.

---

### GET /v1/tools
Returns registered tool specifications.
200:
```
{
  "tools": [ { type: "function", function: { name, description, parameters } }, ...],
  "available_tools": ["tool_name", ...]
}
```
Errors: 500 { error: "Failed to generate tool specifications" }.

## System Prompts
Manage built-in and custom system prompts and selection per conversation.
All routes require auth.

### GET /v1/system-prompts
List built-ins and custom prompts.
200:
```
{
  "built_ins": [ { id, name, content, ... } ],
  "custom": [ { id, name, content, ... } ],
  "error": null | "partial_failure_reason"
}
```

### POST /v1/system-prompts
Create custom prompt.
Body (validated): `name` (string), `content` (string), optional metadata per schema.
201: new prompt object.
Errors: 400 validation_error, other codes via service.

### PATCH /v1/system-prompts/{id}
Update custom prompt (partial). 200 updated prompt or 404 not_found.
Errors: 400 validation_error.

### DELETE /v1/system-prompts/{id}
Delete custom prompt. 204 or 404 not_found.

### POST /v1/system-prompts/{id}/duplicate
Duplicate prompt. 201 new prompt or 404 not_found.

### POST /v1/system-prompts/none/select
Clear active prompt for a conversation.
Body: `{ "conversation_id": "uuid" }`
200: result object.
Errors: 400 validation_error, service-specific codes.

### POST /v1/system-prompts/{id}/select
Select a prompt for a conversation (optionally inline override content).
Body: `{ "conversation_id": "uuid", "inline_override?": "string" }`
200: selection result (includes active prompt info).
Errors: 400 validation_error, 404 not_found, service-specific codes.

## Images
Image upload & retrieval (user isolated). All retrieval requires auth.

### POST /v1/images/upload
Multipart form-data with field name `images` (1..maxImagesPerMessage).
Returns:
- 200 `{ success: true, images: [ { id, url, filename, originalFilename, size, type, alt } ] }`
- 207 Multi-Status if partial success: `{ success: true, images: [...], errors: [ { filename, error } ] }`
Errors: 400 no_files|upload_failed, 413 file_too_large|too_many_files, 500 upload_failed.

### GET /v1/images/config
Public config for client validation.
200 `{ maxFileSize, maxDimensions, maxImagesPerMessage, allowedFormats, uploadRateLimit, storageLimitPerUser }`

### GET /v1/images/{imageId}
Serve image (must belong to user). Handles ETag / 304.
Responses:
- 200 binary image data with headers.
- 304 not modified.
- 400 invalid_image_id
- 404 not_found
- 500 serve_failed

## Error Codes (Non-exhaustive)
- authentication: invalid_token, refresh_token_expired, invalid_refresh_token
- validation: validation_error, invalid_request, bad_request, weak_password, invalid_email
- providers: conflict, not_found, disabled, test_failed, provider_error, bad_gateway, invalid_provider
- conversations: not_implemented, internal_error, db_error
- prompts: not_found, validation_error, internal_server_error
- images: no_files, file_too_large, too_many_files, invalid_image_id, serve_failed, upload_failed

## Security Notes
- All mutating operations require valid JWT.
- Provider API keys never exposed except through operations requiring user auth; model listing proxied server-side.
- Image access enforced per-user; direct path guessing returns 404.
- System prompt content never appears in logs.

## Rate Limiting
- Auth endpoints have explicit rate limits (see above). Other endpoints may rely on upstream infra or future middleware.

## Streaming Chat Protocol
When `stream:true` chat responses use SSE with event lines following OpenAI spec. Tool calls appear as interim messages with tool invocation metadata; final message terminates with `[DONE]` sentinel.

## Versioning & Compatibility
- Current version path prefix: `/v1`.
- Non-breaking additions may introduce new fields; clients should ignore unknown fields.

## Change Log (since initial spec)
- 2025-10-07: Initial authored spec.

---
For questions or proposing changes, open a PR updating this file alongside corresponding tests in `backend/__tests__/*`.

Commit message:

fix: fetching model list from anthropic

docs/backend_api_spec.md, after:

# ChatForge Backend API Specification

Version: 2025-10-07
Status: Draft (authoritative for current code on branch `refactor/frontend_rewrite`)
Base URL: `https://<host>` (all endpoints are prefixed with `/v1` except health which also supports `/health`/`/healthz`)
Authentication: JSON Web Tokens (JWT) via `Authorization: Bearer <accessToken>` unless explicitly marked Public.
Content Type: `application/json` unless stated (multipart for image upload, SSE for streaming chat if enabled by client request headers).

## Conventions
- All date/time fields are ISO 8601 UTC strings unless otherwise noted.
- IDs are UUID v4 (or NanoID for images) unless externally sourced.
- Pagination uses opaque `cursor` tokens where provided; message pagination uses `after_seq` integer sequence numbers.
- Errors follow `{ error: <code>, message?: <human readable>, details?: any }`.
- All data is user-scoped: authenticated user only sees/acts on their own resources.

## Authentication & Users

### POST /v1/auth/register
Register a new user.
Request JSON body:
```
{
  "email": "user@example.com",
  "password": "min 8 chars",
  "displayName": "Optional Name"
}
```
Responses:
- 201 Created:
```
{
  "user": {"id":"...","email":"...","displayName": "...", "emailVerified": false, "createdAt": "..."},
  "tokens": { "accessToken": "...", "refreshToken": "..." }
}
```
- 400 validation_error | invalid_email | weak_password
- 409 email_taken
- 500 registration_failed
Rate limits: 3/hour/IP.

### POST /v1/auth/login
Authenticate existing user.
Request body: `{ "email": "...", "password": "..." }`
Success 200:
```
{
  "user": {"id":"...","email":"...","displayName":"...","emailVerified":false,"createdAt":"...","lastLoginAt":"..."},
  "tokens": {"accessToken":"...","refreshToken":"..."}
}
```
Errors: 400 validation_error, 401 invalid_credentials, 500 login_failed.
Rate limits: 5 / 15min / IP.

### POST /v1/auth/refresh
Refresh access token.
Body: `{ "refreshToken": "<token>" }`
200: `{ "accessToken": "..." }`
Errors: 400 validation_error, 401 refresh_token_expired, 403 invalid_refresh_token | invalid_token, 500 refresh_failed.

### GET /v1/auth/me
Auth required. Returns `{ "user": { id, email, displayName, ... } }`.

### POST /v1/auth/logout
Stateless logout (client discards tokens). Always 200: `{ "message": "Logged out successfully" }`.

## Health

### GET /health or /healthz
Public. Returns status + environment basics.
```
{
  "status": "ok",
  "uptime": <seconds>,
  "provider": "openai-compatible",
  "model": "<defaultModel>",
  "persistence": { "enabled": true, "retentionDays": <int> }
}
```

## Providers
Manage upstream AI API provider configurations (per user).
All endpoints require auth.

### GET /v1/providers
List providers: `{ "providers": [ { id, name, provider_type, base_url, enabled, is_default, created_at, ... } ] }`

### GET /v1/providers/default
Get effective default provider. 200 provider object or 404 not_found.

### GET /v1/providers/{id}
Get single provider. 404 not_found.

### POST /v1/providers
Create provider.
Body fields:
```
{
  "id?": "uuid (optional)",
  "name": "string",
  "provider_type": "openai|...",
  "api_key?": "string",
  "base_url?": "https://...",
  "enabled?": true,
  "is_default?": false,
  "extra_headers?": { "Header": "Value" },
  "metadata?": { "model_filter": { /* filter spec */ }, ... }
}
```
Responses: 201 with created object; 400 invalid_request; 409 conflict (duplicate); 500 internal_server_error.

### PUT /v1/providers/{id}
Update mutable fields (same shape as create, all optional). 200 updated, 404 not_found.

### POST /v1/providers/{id}/default
Set provider as default. 200 provider, 404 not_found.

### DELETE /v1/providers/{id}
Deletes provider. 204 empty or 404 not_found.

### GET /v1/providers/{id}/models
Fetch upstream models via stored credentials. Applies optional model filtering.
Note: If provider's `base_url` is not set, defaults are used based on `provider_type`. Authentication headers are automatically set based on provider type (Anthropic uses `x-api-key`, others use `Authorization: Bearer`).
Success: `{ provider: { id, name, provider_type }, models: [ { id, ...upstream } ] }`
Errors: 400 invalid_provider | disabled | bad request reasons; 404 not_found; 502 bad_gateway/provider_error; 500 internal_server_error.

### POST /v1/providers/test
Test a provider configuration without saving.
Body requires: `name`, `provider_type`, `api_key`; optional `base_url`, `extra_headers`, `metadata.model_filter`.
Note: If `base_url` is omitted, defaults are used based on `provider_type` (e.g., Anthropic → `https://api.anthropic.com`, OpenAI → `https://api.openai.com`).
Success 200: `{ success: true, message: "Connection successful! Found X models (sample1, sample2, ...).", models: <count> }`
Errors 400 test_failed (with detail), 400 invalid_request.

### POST /v1/providers/{id}/test
Test an existing stored provider (optionally overriding `base_url`, `extra_headers`, `metadata.model_filter`). Similar response codes to generic test.

## Conversations
Conversation & message lifecycle (requires persistence enabled). All routes require auth. If persistence disabled, routes respond 501 not_implemented.

### POST /v1/conversations/migrate
Migrates anonymous (session-bound) conversations to authenticated user.
Body: none.
Success 200: `{ migrated: <int>, message: "..." }`.
Errors: 400 bad_request (no session), 500 internal_error.

### GET /v1/conversations
Query params: `cursor?`, `limit?`, `include_deleted?=true|false`.
Returns cursor-paginated list.
Success 200: shape:
```
{
  "items": [ { id, title, model, provider_id, created_at, updated_at, deleted_at?, ... } ],
  "next_cursor": "..." | null
}
```
Errors 500 internal_error.

### POST /v1/conversations
Create conversation.
Body (all optional except may desire model/provider):
```
{
  "title?": "string",
  "provider_id?": "uuid",
  "model?": "model-id",
  "streamingEnabled?": true,
  "toolsEnabled?": true,
  "qualityLevel?": "default|...",
  "reasoningEffort?": "low|medium|high",
  "verbosity?": "...",
  "system_prompt?": "string"  // or legacy systemPrompt
}
```
201: Full conversation record including metadata.
Errors: 500 db_error/internal_error.

### GET /v1/conversations/{id}
Query params: `after_seq?=N` (default 0), `limit?=50`.
Returns conversation metadata plus paginated messages.
200 Response shape:
```
{
  id, title, model, provider_id,
  system_prompt: "..." | null,
  active_system_prompt_id: "uuid" | null,
  messages: [ { id, seq, role, content, created_at, ... } ],
  next_after_seq: <next seq or null>,
  ...other conversation fields
}
```
Errors: 404 not_found, 500 internal_error.

### DELETE /v1/conversations/{id}
Soft delete (marks deleted_at). 204 or 404 not_found.

### PUT /v1/conversations/{id}/messages/{messageId}/edit
Edits message content then forks conversation starting from that message; deletes subsequent messages in original.
Body:
- `content`: string OR mixed-content array (objects with type `text` + `text` field or `image_url` etc.)
Validation: must not be empty (at least one text or image element).
200:
```
{
  "message": { id, seq, content },
  "new_conversation_id": "uuid"
}
```
Errors: 400 bad_request, 404 not_found, 500 internal_error.

## Chat (Proxy Completions & Tools)
All endpoints require auth.

### POST /v1/chat/completions
See [Chat Completions Spec](./backend_api_chat_completions_spec.md) for full details.

---

### GET /v1/tools
Returns registered tool specifications.
200:
```
{
  "tools": [ { type: "function", function: { name, description, parameters } }, ...],
  "available_tools": ["tool_name", ...]
}
```
Errors: 500 { error: "Failed to generate tool specifications" }.

## System Prompts
Manage built-in and custom system prompts and selection per conversation.
All routes require auth.

### GET /v1/system-prompts
List built-ins and custom prompts.
200:
```
{
  "built_ins": [ { id, name, content, ... } ],
  "custom": [ { id, name, content, ... } ],
  "error": null | "partial_failure_reason"
}
```

### POST /v1/system-prompts
Create custom prompt.
Body (validated): `name` (string), `content` (string), optional metadata per schema.
201: new prompt object.
Errors: 400 validation_error, other codes via service.

### PATCH /v1/system-prompts/{id}
Update custom prompt (partial). 200 updated prompt or 404 not_found.
Errors: 400 validation_error.

### DELETE /v1/system-prompts/{id}
Delete custom prompt. 204 or 404 not_found.

### POST /v1/system-prompts/{id}/duplicate
Duplicate prompt. 201 new prompt or 404 not_found.

### POST /v1/system-prompts/none/select
Clear active prompt for a conversation.
Body: `{ "conversation_id": "uuid" }`
200: result object.
Errors: 400 validation_error, service-specific codes.

### POST /v1/system-prompts/{id}/select
Select a prompt for a conversation (optionally inline override content).
Body: `{ "conversation_id": "uuid", "inline_override?": "string" }`
200: selection result (includes active prompt info).
Errors: 400 validation_error, 404 not_found, service-specific codes.

## Images
Image upload & retrieval (user isolated). All retrieval requires auth.

### POST /v1/images/upload
Multipart form-data with field name `images` (1..maxImagesPerMessage).
Returns:
- 200 `{ success: true, images: [ { id, url, filename, originalFilename, size, type, alt } ] }`
- 207 Multi-Status if partial success: `{ success: true, images: [...], errors: [ { filename, error } ] }`
Errors: 400 no_files|upload_failed, 413 file_too_large|too_many_files, 500 upload_failed.

### GET /v1/images/config
Public config for client validation.
200 `{ maxFileSize, maxDimensions, maxImagesPerMessage, allowedFormats, uploadRateLimit, storageLimitPerUser }`

### GET /v1/images/{imageId}
Serve image (must belong to user). Handles ETag / 304.
Responses:
- 200 binary image data with headers.
- 304 not modified.
- 400 invalid_image_id
- 404 not_found
- 500 serve_failed

## Error Codes (Non-exhaustive)
- authentication: invalid_token, refresh_token_expired, invalid_refresh_token
- validation: validation_error, invalid_request, bad_request, weak_password, invalid_email
- providers: conflict, not_found, disabled, test_failed, provider_error, bad_gateway, invalid_provider
- conversations: not_implemented, internal_error, db_error
- prompts: not_found, validation_error, internal_server_error
- images: no_files, file_too_large, too_many_files, invalid_image_id, serve_failed, upload_failed

## Security Notes
- All mutating operations require valid JWT.
- Provider API keys never exposed except through operations requiring user auth; model listing proxied server-side.
- Image access enforced per-user; direct path guessing returns 404.
- System prompt content never appears in logs.

## Rate Limiting
- Auth endpoints have explicit rate limits (see above). Other endpoints may rely on upstream infra or future middleware.

## Streaming Chat Protocol
When `stream:true` chat responses use SSE with event lines following OpenAI spec. Tool calls appear as interim messages with tool invocation metadata; final message terminates with `[DONE]` sentinel.

## Versioning & Compatibility
- Current version path prefix: `/v1`.
- Non-breaking additions may introduce new fields; clients should ignore unknown fields.

## Change Log (since initial spec)
- 2025-10-07: Initial authored spec.

---
For questions or proposing changes, open a PR updating this file alongside corresponding tests in `backend/__tests__/*`.
